QQ Calculating the density of a sphere of material
requires the volume which will involve the diameter of 
that sphere raised to the what power?
AA 1 (1) 3rd (2) 2nd (3) 1st (4) 0th (5) 4th

QQ Which of the following statements does not use the
term angular size or angular distance correctly?
AA S 1 (1)  The angular distance between those two bright
stars in the sky is about 2 meters.
(2)  The angular distance between those two houses in the
distance is 10 degrees.
(3)  The angular size of the Sun is about the same as that
of the Moon.
(4)  The angular size of the Moon is about 1/2 degree.
(5)  You can use your outstretched hand to estimate
angular sizes and angular distances.

QQ How many arcseconds are in 1 degree?
AA S 1 (1)  3,600 (2)  360 (3)  100 (4) 10,000 (5) 60

QQ Which number from the listed below was obtained from 
astronomical observations rather than an arbitrary human 
definition? 
AA S 1 (1) a year contains 365 days 
(2) a century contains 100 years 
(3) a circle contains 360 degrees 
(4) an hour contains 60 minutes 
(5) a day contains 24 hours 

QQ Polaris will not always be directly over the north pole
of the Earth because of 
AA S 1 (1) precession. (2) ellipses. (3) eclipses (4) dark
matter. (5) proper motion.

QQ The shift in direction to a nearby object that we see
when we look first with one eye and then with the other eye
is called 
AA S 1 (1) parallax (2) precession (3) angular distance 
(4) angular size (5) none of the other four answers

QQ Which of the following has your "address" in the
correct order?
AA S 1 (1)  you, Earth, solar system, Milky Way, 
Local Group, Local Supercluster
(2)  you, Earth, Local Group, Local Supercluster, solar
system, Milky Way
(3)  you, Earth, solar system, Local Group, Milky Way, Local
Supercluster
(4)  you, Earth, solar system, Milky Way, Local
Supercluster, Local Group 
(5)  you, Earth, solar system, Local Group, Local
Supercluster, Milky Way

QQ Which of the following best describes what we mean by the universe? 
AA S 1 (1) the sum total of all matter and energy 
(2) a vast collection of stars that number as many as the grains of 
sand on all the beaches on Earth 
(3) all the galaxies in all the superclusters 
(4) the universe is another name for our Milky Way Galaxy 
(5) everything that can be seen with telescopes

QQ Which of the following statements does not use the
term light-year in an appropriate way?
AA S 1 (1)  It will take me light-years to complete this
homework assignment.
(2)  A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometers.
(3)  The Milky Way Galaxy is about 100,000 light-years in
diameter.
(4)  It will take the Voyager spacecraft about 20,000
years to travel just 1 light-year.
(5)  It's about 4 light-years from here to Alpha Centauri.

QQ Which of the following is largest?
AA S 1 (1)  size of a typical galaxy
(2)  1 light-year
(3)  distance to the nearest star (other than our Sun)
(4)  size of Pluto's orbit
(5)  typical distance to a comet

QQ Why is it summer in the Northern Hemisphere when it is
winter in  the Southern Hemisphere?
AA S 1 (1)  The Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the
Sun and receives more direct sunlight.
(2)  The Northern Hemisphere is "on top" of the Earth and
therefore receives more sunlight.
(3)  The Northern Hemisphere is closer to the Sun than the
Southern Hemisphere.
(4)  The Northern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun
and receives more indirect sunlight.
(5)  It isn't: both hemispheres have the same seasons at
the same time.

QQ Which of the following statements about the celestial
sphere is not true?
AA S 1 (1)  The "celestial sphere" is just another name
for our universe.
(2)  The celestial sphere does not exist physically.
(3)  When we look in the sky, the stars all appear as though
they are located on the celestial sphere.
(4)  The Earth is placed at the center of the celestial
sphere.
(5)  From any location on Earth, we can see only half the
celestial sphere at any one time.

QQ What is a circumpolar star?
AA S 1 (1)  a star that always remains above your 
horizon or always below your horizon
(2)  a star that is visible from the Arctic or Antarctic
circles
(3)  a star that is close to the north celestial pole
(4)  a star that is close to the south celestial pole
(5)  a star that makes a daily circle around the celestial
sphere

QQ What makes the North Star, Polaris, special?
AA S 1 (1)  It currently appears very near the north 
celestial pole.
(2)  It is the star directly on your northern horizon.
(3)  It is the brightest star in the sky.
(4)  It is the star straight overhead.
(5)  It can be used to determine your longitude on Earth.

QQ What is the ecliptic?
AA S 1 (1)  the Sun's apparent path around the celestial
sphere
(2)  the Moon's apparent path along the celestial sphere
(3)  when the Moon passes in front of the Sun
(4)  the constellations commonly used in astrology to
predict the future
(5)  the Sun's daily path across the sky

QQ Why were ancient peoples unable to detect stellar
parallax?
AA S 1 (1)  They did not have the ability to measure very
small angles.
(2)  They could not see distant stars.
(3)  They did not look for it.
(4)  They did not observe for long enough periods of time.
(5)  They did detect it, but they rejected the observations.

QQ If the Moon is setting at sunrise the phase of the
Moon must be
AA S 1 (1)  full.
(2)  third quarter.
(3)  first quarter.
(4)  new.
(5)  waning crescent.

QQ Why do we see essentially the same face of the Moon at
all times?
AA S 1 (1)  because the Moon's periods of rotation and
revolution (orit) are equal
(2)  because the Moon does not rotate
(3)  because the other face points toward us only at new
moon, when we can't see the Moon
(4)  because the Sun only illuminates one half at a time
(5)  because the Moon has a nearly circular orbit around
the Earth

QQ What effect or effects would be most significant if
the Moon's orbital plane were exactly the same as the 
ecliptic plane?
(A)  Solar eclipses would be much more frequent.
(B)  Solar eclipses would be much rarer.
(C)  Solar eclipses would last a much shorter time.
AA 1 (1)  A  (2)  B (3)  C (4)  Both A and C. (5)  Both B
and C.

QQ The astrology practiced by those who cast predictive
horoscopes can be scientifically tested by 
AA S 1 (1) comparing how often the predictions come true
to what would be expected by pure chance.
(2) asking astrologers if it works.
(3) polling people to find out what percentage believe
their horoscopes  to be accurate.
(4) counting how many times the predictions come true.
(5) asking how many famous people believe in astrology.

QQ If Eratosthenes were to have mistakenly measured the
zenith angle to be 14 degrees rather than the 7 degrees 
it was at Alexandria, he would have concluded that the 
Earth was 
AA S 1 (1) smaller in diameter.
(2) much farther from the Sun
(3) spinning faster.
(4) larger in diameter.
(5) much nearer the sun.

QQ Which of the following statements about scientific
models is best?
AA S 1 (1)  A model can be used to explain and predict
real phenomena.
(2)  A model tries to represent only one aspect of nature.
(3)  A model tries to represent all aspects of nature.
(4)  All models that explain nature well are correct.
(5)  All current models are correct.

QQ How did the Ptolemaic model explain the apparent
retrograde motion of the planets?
AA S 1 (1)  It held that the planets moved along small
circles that moved on larger circles around the Earth.
(2)  It placed the Sun at the center so that the planets'
apparent retrograde motion was seen as the Earth passed 
each one in its orbit.
(3)  It varied the motion of the celestial sphere so that
it sometimes moved backward.
(4)  It held that the planets moved along small circles
that moved on larger circles around the Sun.
(5)  It held that sometimes the planets moved backward
along their circular orbits.

QQ The internationally favored unit to measure energy is
the 
AA S 1 (1) joule. (2) Calorie. (3) British thermal unit. 
(4) kilowatt-hour. (5) erg-minute.

QQ Which of the following has the greatest kinetic energy? 
AA S 1 (1) the Space Shuttle orbiting at 17,000 mph with
rockets off.
(2) the Space Shuttle gliding without engines at 300 mph
(3) the Space Shuttle one hour before launch, perched 10
meters off the ground, attached to its launch rocket.
(4) the Space Shuttle launching at 1,000 mph with rockets
at full throttle.
(5) the Space Shuttle re-entering the Earth's atmosphere
and glowing red hot.

QQ Absolute zero is
AA S 1 (1)  0 Kelvins.
(2)  0 degrees  Celsius.
(3)  0 degrees Fahrenheit.
(4)  32 degrees  Fahrenheit.
(5)  273 degrees Celsius.

QQ Suppose you heat up an oven to 350 degrees F and boil 
a pot of water. Which of the following explains why you 
would be burned by sticking your hand briefly in the pot 
but not by sticking your hand briefly in the oven?
AA S 1 (1)  The water has a higher heat content than the
oven.
(2)  The water has a higher temperature than the oven.
(3)  The oven has a higher heat content than the water.
(4)  The molecules in the water are moving faster than the
molecules in the oven.
(5)  The oven has a higher temperature than the water.

QQ Considering Einstein's famous equation, E = mc**2, which
of the following statements is true?
AA S 1 (1)  A small amount of mass can be turned into a
large amount of energy.
(2)  It takes a large amount of mass to produce a small
amount of energy.
(3)  Mass can be turned into energy, but energy cannot
be turned back into mass.
(4)  You can make mass into energy if you can accelerate the
mass to the speed of light.
(5)  One kilogram of mass represents 1 joule of energy.

QQ The difference between speed and velocity is that 
AA S 1 (1) a direction is needed to specify the velocity,
whereas the speed only requires the magnitude of the rate of
change of the position of the particle. 
(2) velocity is the same as acceleration whereas speed is
different. 
(3) they are expressed in different units.
(4) There is no difference between velocity and speed.
(5) velocity is calculated using a physics equation.

QQ An astronomical unit is the distance 
AA S 1 (1) between the Earth and our Sun on average. 
(2) to the nearest star.
(3) across our galaxy. 
(4) light travels in one year. 
(5) between the Sun and any planet.

QQ Which of the following is an example in which you are
traveling at constant speed but not at constant velocity?
AA S 1 (1)  driving around in a circle at exactly 100 km/hr
(2)  driving backward at exactly 50 km/hr
(3)  rolling freely down a hill in a cart, traveling in a
straight line
(4)  jumping up and down, with a period of exactly 60 hops
per minute
(5)  None of the above.

QQ If you drop a rock from a great height, about how fast
will it be falling after 5 seconds, neglecting air
resistance?
AA S 1 (1)  50 meters per second
(2)  It depends on what shape it is.
(3)  10 meters per second
(4)  15 meters per second
(5)  It depends on how heavy it is.

QQ If your mass is 60 kg on Earth, what would your mass
be on the Moon?
AA S 1 (1)  60 kg (2) 10 kg (3) 50 kg (4) 10 lb (5) 60 lb

QQ Suppose an object is moving in a straight line at 50
miles per hr. According to Newton's first law of motion, 
the object will
AA S 1 (1)  continue to move in the same way until it is
acted upon by a force.
(2)  continue to move in the same way forever, no matter
what happens.
(3)  eventually slow down and come to a stop.
(4)  continue to move in a straight line forever if it is
in space, but fall to the ground if it is on Earth.
(5) continue to move in a straight line if there is no air
resistance.

QQ Which of the following statements is not one of
Newton's laws of motion?
AA S 1 (1)  What goes up must come down.
(2)  The rate of change of momentum of an object is equal
to the net force applied to the object.
(3)  In the absence of a net force, an object moves with
constant velocity.
(4)  For any force, there always is an equal and opposite
reaction force.
(5)  All of the other four are Newton's laws of motion.

QQ A skater can spin faster by pulling in her arms closer
to her body or spin slower by spreading her arms out from
her
body. This is due to
AA S 1 (1)  conservation of angular momentum.
(2)  Newton's third law.
(3)  conservation of momentum.
(4)  the law of gravity.
(5)  conservation of energy.

QQ Kepler's third law, p**2 = a**3, means that
AA S 1 (1)  All of the other four answers are correct.
(2)  all orbits with the same semimajor axis have the same
period.
(3)  the period of a planet does not depend on its mass.
(4)  planets that are farther from the Sun move at slower
average speeds than nearer planets.
(5)  a planet's period does not depend on the eccentricity
of its orbit.

QQ A contribution of Galileo to our knowledge of physics
and astronomy was
AA S 1 (1) all of the other four answers
(2) observing sunspots
(3) discovering the moons of Jupiter
(4) observing that Venus goes through a full range of phases
(5) observing the Milky Way was made of stars

QQ The force of gravity is an inverse square law. This
means that, if you double the distance between two large 
masses, the gravitational force between them
AA S 1 (1)  weakens by a factor of 4.
(2)  strengthens by a factor of 4.
(3)  also doubles.
(4)  weakens by a factor of 2.
(5)  is unaffected.

QQ Which of the following best describes the origin of
ocean tides on Earth?
AA S 1 (1)  Tides are caused by the difference in the
force of gravity exerted by the Moon across the sphere of 
the Earth.
(2)  The Moon's gravity pulls harder on water than on
land, because water is less dense than rock.
(3)  Tides are caused by the 23 1/2 degree tilt of the
Earth's rotational axis to the ecliptic plane.
(4)  Tides are caused primarily by the gravitational force
of the Sun.
(5)  Tides are caused on the side of the Earth nearest the
Moon because the Moon's gravity attracts the water.


